I

INTRODUCTION

THE CASE OF RICHARD CABOT
Paul Dudley White, the distinguished cardiologist, wrote of Richard Cabot after his
death :
In every generation there are restless
souls who cannot be made to fit the common
mold . A few of these are valuable in keeping their communities and professions in
a ferment by their constant challenge to the
existing order of man's thought and action .
But when, in addition to possessing these
attributes, a rare individual is endowed
with the divine fire and makes important
contributions to the pioneering progress of
humanity, then indeed we recognize a great
leader . In the thick of the fray such recognition comes slowly but as soon as the
smoke of the battle clears the acclaim is
universal. (1939)

Born into an old Bostonian family in 1868,
Cabot was graduated from Harvard College in 1889 with a major in philosophy,
his father's pursuit . After considering a career in the Unitarian ministry, he
chose medicine and was graduated from Harvard Medical School in 1892 at age
24 . His senior thesis was on "The Medical Bearing of Mind-Care," a study of
healing by Christian Science .
During his internship at Massachusetts General Hospital, Cabot published a
paper entitled "Leucocytosis as an Element in the Prognosis of Pneumonia" (see
White, 1939), in which he described the elevated white blood cell count in pyogenic infections . Cabot spent the following year in hematologic research . His
studies of blood culminated in his first book, A Guide to the Clinical Examination
of the Blood, which was published in 1896 and went through five editions . In its
preface he wrote, "the first book of its kind, so far as I am aware ." Despite a
busy private practice and service to outpatients at Massachusetts General Hospital, Cabot published a monograph, The Serum Diagnosis of Disease, in 1899, and another, Physical Diagnosis of Diseases of the Chest, in 1901 . He expanded the latter
book to include the rest of the body, writing twelve editions from 1901 to 1938 .
His book, Differential Diagnosis, published in 1938, went through seven editions .
He emphasized errors of omission and commission in clinical diagnosis .
Cabot devoted much time to clinical research, gathering data from a large
number of cases and then applying statistical analysis . He sought facts . After
examining autopsy reports of 3000 cases, Cabot wrote in 1912 a controversial
paper in which he pointed out "a goodly number of `classic' time-honored mistakes in diagnosis ." In response to a Chicago physician who criticized his pessimism, Cabot wrote :
When he has had three thousand clinical diagnoses criticized at autopsy by an
independent and unprejudiced pathologist who makes full bacteriologic and histologic
examinations of every case, he will find, I believe, that the facts are not less unpleasant
than I have stated them to be . He will know that his most scrupulous and careful
examination of the precordia often fails to reveal acute pericarditis when it is present ;
that his examination of the urine will not always distinguish either acute or chronic
nephritis from other conditions resembling them, and that mitral stenosis and aortic
stenosis are sometimes overlooked by the best diagnosticians . (1913)
Cabot's paper on "The Four Common Types of Heart Disease" appeared in
1914 and is a landmark in medical history . For the first time, heart disease was
classified according to its cause, which was a revolutionary point of view . He
reported that 93% of 600 cases of heart disease were of either rheumatic, atherosclerotic, syphilitic, or nephritic etiology . Paul Dudley White (1939) described
Cabot as the greatest contributor to cardiology in his generation .
After Walter B . Cannon introduced the idea of case teaching in medicine in
1900, Cabot became its most ardent advocate . His Exercises in Differential Diagnosis,
published in 1902, consisted of 43 case summaries, each ending with the questions "Diagnosis? Prognosis? Treatment?" Cabot stressed the importance of deciding on a diagnosis and writing it down . He believed that "after the student
has learned to open his eyes and see, he must learn to shut them and think"
(1908) . He considered the case method superior to other methods of teaching
medicine . Wrote Cabot,
By using this method a single teacher can keep a large class of students actively busy .
They are not merely listening or watching ; they are doing the work of construction
themselves . In lectures or large amphitheatre clinics the whole class is managed by one
teacher, but the teacher does the work and hence the student's gain is relatively slight .
(1908)
Cabot believed strongly in student participation, that the case method of teaching
succeeds when the students are called on by name, that "only if no one in the
class knows the answer should the teacher give it himself; for the process of
answering serves to fix the fact in the student's mind and he should never be
deprived of this benefit" (1908) . The clinicopathologic conference, or CPC, was
originated by Cabot in 1910, a result of his emphasis on the case study and the
confirmation of a diagnosis by autopsy . His regular conference was held at
Massachusetts General Hospital, a record of which was edited by him and published in the Boston Medical and Surgical Journal (now the New England Journal of
Medicine) from 1924 to 1935 .

Apart from his medical activities, Cabot gave much attention to social services,
which he founded at Massachusetts General Hospital in 1905 . His book, Social
Service and the Art of Healing, appeared in 1909 . Cabot's lifelong interest in ethics
resulted in several books on the subject, and in 1919 at age 51, he was appointed
professor of social ethics in addition to professor of clinical medicine . He was
working on a philosophical treatise called "Creation" when he died in Boston
in 1939 .
-CHARLES STEWART ROBERTS

REFERENCES
Cabot RC . Case teaching in medicine . Boston : D .C . Heath, 1908 .
Cabot RC . Diagnostic pitfalls identified during a study of three thousand autopsies . JAMA
1912 ;59 :2295-98 .
Cabot RC . Letter. JAMA 1913 ;60 :145 .
White PD . Richard Clarke Cabot 1868-1939 . New Engl J Med 1939 ;220 :1049-52 .

1

The Origins of the History and
Physical Examination
H. KENNETH WALKER
Each of us should strive "to rise above the routines of the daily
ward round and to see in every patient an opportunity not only
to serve mankind in the best tradition of medical excellence, but
to add to the store of medical knowledge ."
-A . MCGEHEE HARVEY (1973)

Ten individuals are responsible for the development of
modern physical diagnosis : Hippocrates, Vesalius, Morgagni, Sydenham, Auenbrugger, Corvisart, Laennec, Louis,
Mueller, and Osler . Their accomplishments form a "golden
thread [that runs] throughout the history of the world, consecutive and continuous, the work of the best men in successive ages" (Moxon, quoted by William Osler) . The pool
of information presented in this book has been created by
the scholarship of these ten men . They were physicians
going about the daily practice of medicine . The story of
their achievements serves to stimulate the spirit of inquiry
in each of us and underscores the obligation we have to add
to this pool of knowledge . This chapter traces the historical
evolution of modern clinical diagnosis . Knowledge of this
evolution provides the student with a foundation upon which
to build mastery of the art and science of diagnosis .
Seven crucial developments over the past 3000 years
shaped physical diagnosis as we know it today . Hippocrates
and his colleagues laid the foundations by establishing medicine as a profession and by declaring that it has a rational
basis . The second development was the resumption of the
dissection of human bodies for educational purposes, beginning in the thirteenth century in Italy . Vesalius was
thereby able to publish an accurate human anatomy text in
1543, and Morgagni to establish morbid anatomy, or pathology, as a discipline in 1761 . The third development was
Sydenham's definition of disease between 1666 and 1683,
leading to the nosological concept of disease . The actual
beginnings of physical diagnosis occurred with the discovery
of percussion by Auenbrugger in 1760, and its dissemination by Corvisart in 1808 . Laennec invented the stethoscope
in 1816, beginning a century of explosive development in
physical diagnosis . The French School, exemplified by Pierre
Louis, synthesized the previous developments and put physical diagnosis on a secure footing at the bedside and in the
autopsy room during the period 1800 until 1850 . The German School, epitomized by Johannes Mueller, laid the foundation for experimental laboratory science from 1830 until
1900 . These six developments were applied to medical education by William Osler in the medical clinic at Johns Hopkins University in 1893, thereby revolutionizing medical
education and the practice of medicine in America and the
Western world . Table 1 .1 summarizes these developments .
There were a number of important developments in addition to the seven crucial ones outlined above : the model
of bedside teaching developed by Boerhaave at Leyden about
1700 ; the development of precision instruments such as the
thermometer, microscope, ophthalmoscope, kymograph,and sphygmomanometer ; and the discovery of the x-ray .
The urban migration in Europe in the late 1700s and early
1800s, coupled with the development of the French hospital
system, made available to physicians a concentration of human illness never seen before . The ascendance of the German and American university had a profound influence on
medicine . Once again, the genius of William Osler wove all
these threads into the fabric that established clinical diagnosis and medical education as it exists today .
Hippocrates : A Rational Profession
460-370 B .C .
Physical diagnosis had its origins in Grecian medicine . Clinical medicine flourished before the Greeks, especially in
Egypt, Crete, and Babylonia, and undoubtedly the Greeks
were influenced by these earlier physicians . But writings
from these countries did not become part of the mainstream
of Western civilization, as did those of the Greeks . Table
1 .2 contains two quotations that illustrate the level of medicine practiced by the Greeks . They took a careful history
and practiced direct auscultation . They were masters of
observation : their descriptions of patients could fit modern
texts without much change .
Greek medicine flourished early . Homer in the Iliad (ca
1200 B .c .) described 141 wounds and used 150 anatomic
terms . Hippocrates (ca 460-370 B .c .) lived during the Golden
Age of Greece . His contemporaries included Plato, Socrates,
Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes, and Pericles . Medicine "became in his hands an art, a science, a
profession" (Major, 1954) . The Hippocratic writings are
probably a collection from a number of individuals, including the master, from the period during which he was the
dominant medical figure . They were collected after the death
of Hippocrates and stored in Alexandria . From there, they
were disseminated to all parts of the civilized world . The
surviving collection contains 42 clinical cases, the likes of
which are not encountered again for 1700 years . These cases
demonstrate a high level of medicine that included a careful
history, inspection, palpation, direct auscultation, and examination of the sputum and urine .
An enduring contribution of the Hippocratic school was
the conviction that disease is natural and not divine . Consider the remarks about epilepsy : "It is thus with regard to
the disease called Sacred : It appears to me to be no wise
more divine nor more sacred than other diseases, but has
a natural cause from which it originates like other affec5

Table 1 .1
Crucial Developments in the History of Physical Diagnosis
Date
ca. 400 b.c.

Person
Hippocrates

ca. A .D . 1300
1543

Vesalius

ca . 1670
1761

Sydenham
Morgagni

1761
1808
1816
1800-1850
1830-1900
1893

Auenbrugger
Corvisart
Laennec
Louis
Mueller
Osler

Development
Medicine as a profession ;
disease natural, not divine
Dissection of human bodies
resumes
Fabrica published ; first
accurate anatomy text
Nosology of disease
De Sedibus published .
Pathology begins
Percussion discovered
Popularization of percussion
Stethoscope
French School
German School
Medical clinic at Johns
Hopkins

tions" (Delp and Manning, 1981) . This was a major conceptual leap . Natural phenomena can be studied and their
course predicted . This concept was a necessary prerequisite
to the development of physical diagnosis .
The Greeks did not develop an accurate knowledge of
human anatomy and pathology . Dissection of human bodies
did not occur except for a brief time at Alexandria in the
third century B .C . The Greeks had no concept of nosology .
They felt that disease was caused by an imbalance of the
four humors of the body : blood, yellow bile, black bile, and
phlegm . Developments on these three fronts-anatomy, pathology, and the nosology of disease-did not begin to occur
until the thirteenth century .
The next great Greek physician after Hippocrates was
Galen (ca A .D . 130-201), who was born in Pergamum . He
spent most of his professional life in Rome, becoming physician to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius . He was a prolific
author . Many of his works have been lost ; the surviving
ones fill twenty-two volumes . He studied and wrote extensively about anatomy based upon pigs and monkeys . He was
the first experimental physiologist . He supplemented his
findings by speculation . His written work was accepted as
the ultimate truth until the time of Vesalius . This enshrinement of knowledge, much of which was incorrect, hampered medical progress for the next 1500 years .
Vesalius : Establishment of an Accurate
Anatomy, 1543
Andreas Vesalius founded modern anatomy with the publication of De Humanis Corporis Fabrica (On the Structure of
the Human Body) in June 1543 . His book was based upon
personal dissection of human bodies . This represented a
remarkable departure from the zoological anatomy of Galen .
The accomplishments of Vesalius were possible because of
the resumption of the dissection of human bodies that began
in the thirteenth century .
Human dissection was rare before the thirteenth century . The Egyptians knew the body organs, but only after
extracting them through tiny incisions made for the purposes of embalming . There is continuing controversy about
human dissection during the Hippocratic period . A knowledge of anatomy, except the skeleton, is scanty in the Corpus
Hippocraticum . The consensus is that human dissection was

Table 1 .2
Quotations Illustrating the Level of Greek Medicine
One should pay attention to the first day the patient felt weak ; one
should inquire why and when it began . These are the key points
to keep in mind. After these questions have been cautiously
considered, one should ask the patient how his head feels, or if he
has any pain or if he feels heavy . . . . In regard to the chest, one
should ask the patient if he has pain there and if he has a slight
cough, with pain in the abdomen when he coughs (Littre's
Translation of Hippocrates, 2, 436-40 : Regimen in Acute Disease .
Appendix #9) .
Source: Quoted by Siegel, RE . Clinical observation in Hippocrates : an
essay on the evolution of the diagnostic art . J Mount Sinai Hosp 1964 ;31,
285-86.

not practiced during the Hippocratic period, either because
of reverence for the human body or belief in a life after
death that required an intact body .
Dissection for the purpose of acquiring a knowledge of
the human body probably originated in Alexandria, Egypt,
in the fourth century B .C ., 100 years after Hippocrates .
Herophilus studied the nervous system and gastrointestinal
tract, describing the cerebrum, cerebellum, meninges, fourth
ventricle of the brain, duodenum, and the eye . He counted
the pulse with a water-clock, and analyzed the rate and
rhythm . Erasistratus (ca 310-250 B .C .) described the aortic
and pulmonic valves and the chordae tendineae of the heart .
He clearly saw that the heart was a pump, although he had
the direction of circulation backward .
The practice of human dissection in antiquity was confined largely to Alexandria . Some dissection apparently occurred in Rome until the second century A .D ., but it must
have been sparse . Galen (A .D . 129-200) said Alexandria,
where he had studied, was the only place where anatomy
could be learned . There is no good evidence that Galen
himself practiced human dissection .
Human dissection began again in the thirteenth century
in Bologna, one of the great medieval universities, and has
continued uninterrupted through the present time . Several
occurrences during the early thirteenth century set the stage
for the lifting of the taboo against disturbing the human
body . Emperor Frederic II issued an imperial decree in
1238 authorizing the performance of public "anatomes" on
the bodies of executed criminals for teaching purposes . Legend has it that Frederick II also had the stomachs of two
of his subjects opened in order to determine if digestion
was enhanced by exercise or by rest . Another sign of the
relaxation of the concept of the sanctity of the human body
during the thirteenth century was the practice of dismembering the bodies of the Crusaders and boiling the parts so
that the bones could be returned to their families in Europe
for burial . A more specific reason for the resumption of
human dissection probably had to do with the legal scholars
at the University of Bologna, which was famous for its law
school . The scholars were concerned to know the causes of
deaths for legal reasons .
Mondino of Bologna (ca 1270-1326) was the predecessor
of Vesalius in the founding of anatomy . In 1316 he wrote
his Anothomia, the first text exclusively on anatomy . It was
based on his own dissection of humans . This book was published at Padua in 1487 and went through 39 separate editions and translations . It was an unillustrated manual or
handbook of dissection and not a formal anatomic text . His
method was to begin with the abdominal viscera, then go
to the chest and neck . The book ends with the opening of

1.

THE ORIGINS OF THE HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

the skull . The manual was a student favorite and was widely
used . Mondino's anatomic work was continued by his students, and dissection became more popular . A public dissection occurred at Padua in 1341 . Public dissections were
decreed at the University of Montpelier in 1366, at Venice
in 1368, and at Florence in 1388 . In Padua an anatomic
theater was erected in 1445 . These events set the stage for
Vesalius in the sixteenth century .
Vesalius was born in Brussels in 1514-1515, the son of
a Flemish family that had been in medicine for many generations . He was said to be interested in anatomy even as a
youth, dissecting mice, rats, dogs, and cats . He studied anatomy in Paris under Sylvius, a famous scholar who declared
Galen was infallible . In 1537 he went to Padua, where he
received his medical degree . For the next 5 years he worked
prodigiously as professor of medicine and surgery, breaking
tradition by personally performing all the dissections . At
the end of these 5 years, he published his Fabrica . He was
28 .
The Fabrica was sumptuously illustrated by Titian's pupil
]an Kalkar, who was the first to attain what Choulant
calls the true anatomic norm, that is, a picture at once
scientifically exact and artistically beautiful, summing up,
as in a composite photograph, the innumerable peculiarities and minor variations in structures encountered
in dissection . The splendid wood-cuts representing
majestic skeletons and flagged figures, dwarfing a background of landscape, set the fashion for over a century
and were copied and imitated by a long line of anatomic
illustrators . . . . (Garrison, 1929, p . 219)
Vesalius provided the accurate anatomic base upon which
physical diagnosis could be built . In the words of Major
(1954, p . 404) :
Few men in medical history have dominated their subject
or their epoch as did Andreas Vesalius . The history of
anatomy is divided into three periods : the pre-Vesalian
Period, the Vesalian Period, and the post-Vesalian Period-a tribute to the genius of this great anatomist .
Sydenham : The Nosology of Disease, 1666
Nosology is the branch of medicine that deals with the concept, definition, classification, and nomenclature of disease .
The historic development of nosology was fundamental to
the evolution of diagnosis . A concept essential to modern
medicine is that a particular disease can cause manifestations that can be quite different from one individual to
another . The definition of what constitutes a disease began
with Thomas Sydenham in seventeenth-century England .
Sydenham (1624-1689) was born at Wynford Eagle in Dorset. He obtained his bachelor of medicine from Oxford in
1648 . He was a captain in the cavalry during Oliver Cromwell's campaign in Scotland against Charles II . When the
Restoration came in 1660 and Charles II became king, Sydenham had no political future "and he had no resource
other than a serious devotion to the practice of medicine,
an event with important benefits to all succeeding generations of physicians" (Harvey, 1973) . He began practicing
medicine in London in 1663, after having a lot of trouble
passing the examination of the Royal College of Physicians .
The London of Sydenham's day was notable for the occurrence of one murderous epidemic after another (Faber,
1923) . An epidemic of an acute infectious disease such as

7

smallpox or cholera, which struck thousands suddenly and
left just as swiftly, provided the ideal setting for the development of modern nosologic concepts : a great many previously healthy individuals were suddenly afflicted by what
was clearly the same illness, which at the same time varied
in its manifestations from one person to another . An idea
of the magnitude of these epidemics can be gotten from
population estimates: in 1665 the plague killed about 100,000
of 600,000 inhabitants . The plague stopped by 1667, but
in that year smallpox killed 1300, cholera 2000, phthisis
3000, and only 1000 died of old age (Faber, 1923) . These
figures, although of questionable exactness, nevertheless
depict accurately the effects of these diseases .
In contrast to his contemporaries, Sydenham thought it
was possible, albeit difficult, to construct an accurate picture
of each disease :
And, in truth, it is my opinion that the principal reason
of our yet being destitute of an accurate history of diseases, proceeds from a general supposition that diseases
are no more than the confused and irregular operations
of disordered and debilitated nature, and consequently
that it is a fruitless labor to endeavor to give a just description of them . . . . [The symptoms] observed by Socrates in his illness may generally be applied to any other
person afflicted with the same disease, in the same manner as the general marks of plants justly run through the
same plants of every kind . Thus, for instance, whoever
describes a violet exactly as to its colour, taste, smell,
form, and other properties, will find the description agrees
in most particulars, with all the violets in the universe .
(Faber, 1923, pp. 8-9)
Sydenham laid down four principles that he felt to be important (Faber) :
• All diseases should be classified in species, just as botanists do plants .
• Hypotheses and philosophical speculations should be
eschewed in favor of an objective description of each
disease, described with the same accuracy as when an
artist paints a portrait .
• The manifestations that are constant in each patient
with a particular disease should be distinguished from
other phenomena that could be due to the age, constitution, or treatment of the patient .
• The season of the year in which the disease occurs
should be noted because some diseases "follow the season as surely as many birds and plants ."

Sydenham's first book was on fever : Methodus Curandi Febres
(1666) . His most prominent work is Tractatus de Podagra et
Hydrope (1683) . In it he separated gout (from which he
suffered) from the entities that had been called rheumatism .
Sydenham stressed personal independent observation . He
"first gave clinical observation its place of honor as a scientific method-one which for those who cultivate it effectively is still today a basic asset of the complete physician"
(Harvey, 1973, p . 124) .
The next physician interested in the classification of diseases was Sauvages . In 1731 he published a book in which
he grouped diseases in classes, orders, and genera, just as
the biologists were doing with plants and animals . This book
came to the attention of Linnaeus, who published his Systema
Naturae in 1735 . The two men carried on a lifelong correspondence. Sauvages published his principal work in 1763,
Nosologia methodica sistens moborum classes, genera et species . He

8

1.

INTRODUCTION

described 2400 diseases, divided into 10 classes and 40 orders . In the preface he discussed principles for classifying
disease, choosing symptoms as the basis for his scheme . This
led to many difficulties, given the nature of medical knowledge at the time . There were 18 kinds of angina, 19 types
of asthma, 19 species of dysphagia, 13 different species of
anorexia, etc . This work had much influence upon contemporary medicine ; detailed nosologies following his system
'appeared in various countries . These nosologies, however,
did not appreciably influence the practice of medicine . The
differences between the nosologists of the eighteenth century and Sydenham is that they merely catalogued and
arranged symptoms, while he characterized diseases . Sydenham delineated each disease by its manifestations and
clinical course . Succeeding nosologists classified symptoms .
The distinction between symptom and disease was not appreciated .
The next advance was the development of the discipline
of pathologic anatomy by Morgagni, which is described below . Morgagni established the concept of whole organs being
diseased . Philippe Pinel of Paris published his Nosologie philosophique in 1798 . This book stressed the importance of
arriving at the typical picture of a disease, ignoring the
varying picture in each individual patient . He characterized
2700 diseases and divided them into classes, orders, genera,
and species . He grouped diseases that involved a particular
tissue together, such as all diseases of the mucous membranes . This was an entirely new concept . Previous authors
had arranged disorders according to anatomic location :
heart, lungs, etc . Bichat expanded upon this idea and showed
how disease of each type of tissue could give rise to two
different kinds of symptoms . One group of symptoms is
dependent upon the particular tissue involved, and the other
group is caused by dysfunction of the affected organ . Laennec, who was greatly influenced by Bichat, produced a revolution in nosography with the publication of his book on
auscultation (see below) . Laennec wove symptoms, signs,
and pathologic findings into a series of classic diseases, many
of which he was the first to describe : emphysema, bronchiectasis, pneumothorax . His great achievement was to take
many different conditions grouped under the name phthisis
and show that they were all different stages of one disease,
tuberculosis . He "demonstrated that the process usually begins in the apex of the lung, and that various anatomical
changes may be demonstrated by means of stethoscopy, and
finally he conceived and described tuberculosis of the lungs
as a special disease differing from all other disease processes" (Faber 1923) . Modern nosology begins with Laennec .

Morgagni : The Foundation of Pathologic
Anatomy, 1761
Morbid anatomy had its origins alongside descriptive anatomy . The first known forensic autopsy was done in 1302
in Bologna, which is also where Mondino started descriptive
anatomy (Klemperer, 1957) . The body of an individual
named Azzolino was examined because the authorities felt
his death was suspicious . "Visceral congestion" was found,
and the authorities investigated no further . The great descriptive anatomists of the time all were quite interested in
morbid anatomy . The bodies of executed criminals were
dissected for teaching purposes (anatomia publica), and the
bodies of individuals who died of disease were also examined (anatomia privata) .Vesaliunqrdcefulyintoh

history of the bodies he dissected, and planned to publish
his records, but apparently they were lost or destroyed .
Many of the great physicians and anatomists of the 1500s
and early 1600s strongly advocated autopsies as a means of
furthering clinical medicine . Johannes Schenck von Grafenberg (1534-1576) collected pathologic reports of preceding years, as well as his own experiences, into seven
volumes . His book had a classified index and a collection
of aphorisms designed to arouse interest in pathology . Wilhelm Fabry von Hilden, a physician in Bern, wrote a book
in which he called attention to what had been learned from
autopsies . He noted Germany was behind France and Italy
in medicine because fewer autopsies were performed in
Germany . The public apparently was willing to support autopsies, and, in fact, often requested that they be done on
relatives in order to determine the cause of death . The
situation in the British colonies of North America mirrored
that of Europe . Cotton Mather in Boston described congenital rectal atresia in an autopsy done on his own son . In
Copenhagen, Bartholin was given permission by the authorities to perform autopsies on patients who died in the
public hospitals . Bartholin gave in detail methods by which
permission for autopsies could be obtained as well as other
techniques for gaining the information : looking through a
previously existing surgical incision ; inspecting bodies while
they were being embalmed . He recommended that deception could be used, but he advocated caution and tact (Klemperer, 1957) .
Toxophil Bonetus (1618-1689) was Morgagni's predecessor as the founder of pathologic anatomy . He was a physician who gave up practice in Geneva at the age of 50
because of deafness, and spent the rest of his life writing
medical books . He collected 3000 cases and published in
1679 the Sepulchretum . The full title reads as follows : "Repository of anatomy practiced on corpses deceased of disease, which reports the histories and observations of all
alterations of the human body and reveals the hidden causes .
Indeed, anatomy deserves to be called the foundation of
real pathology and of proper treatment of disease, even the
inspiration of old and recent medicine ." The book was designed to contain each recognizable disease known up to
that time, with a description of the clinical features followed
by the autopsy findings . This book was highly influential
and gave great impetus to pathologic anatomy .
Lancisi of Rome made important contributions to pathology with the publication of De Subitaneis Mortibus in 1707 .
His book contained autopsies on the cases of sudden death
in Rome in 1706 . The stimulus for his work was the panic
of the Roman populace over the large number of sudden
deaths in that year . The clinical and anatomic descriptions
are detailed, with every effort made to correlate the two .
The observations were precise-for example, exact measurements of body organs were given . The causes of unexpected death included cerebral hemorrhage and
hypertrophied hearts ; valvular vegetations were described
clearly. Lancisi's book illustrates the trend toward making
clinicoanatomic correlations .
Hermann Boerhaave (1668-1738) of Leyden was largely
responsible for correlating autopsy results with what was
found at the bedside . He was one of the great consulting
clinicians of his time-his reputation extended even to China,
and he was regularly consulted by emperors . Students from
all of Europe sought his teaching and in turn became the
leading physicians of the eighteenth century . Bedside teaching of clinical medicine had begun at Padua, and was brought
to Leyden by Heurnius . Boerhaave made bedside teaching

1.

THE ORIGINS OF THE HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

an art form . He was given two wards in an old hospital for
the purpose of teaching students, one with six beds for men
and the other with six beds for women . "On twelve beds
half the physicians of Europe were trained!" (Sigerist, 1951) .
Boerhaave made daily rounds with his students, reviewing
the history, inspecting the patient, examining the urine . The
patient was not examined to any extent, since percussion
and auscultation had not been discovered . Boerhaave made
his students attend the autopsy on each patient who died .
He felt postmortem examinations were essential : "In spite
of the most detailed description of all disease phenomena
one does not know anything of the cause until one has
opened the body ." He continues (in his introduction to one
of his books) to say he will try to give an accurate picture
of his observations in order that in subsequent similar cases
the disease can be diagnosed early and cured .
Giovanni Battista Morgagni established pathology as it
is known today with the publication of his monumental work
De sedibus et causis morborum (The Seats and Causes of Diseases) in 1761 . Morgagni was born in 1682 and received his
medical degree from Bologna . In 1715, on the recommendation of Lancisi, he was appointed professor of anatomy
at Padua, filling the chair held previously by Vesalius . He
became a popular teacher, with many foreign students com
ing to Padua just to attend his lectures . His fame as a scholar
and pathologist was such that Samuel Johnson, upon being
asked by Boswell if he believed the tale that a scorpion
surrounded by a ring of fire will withdraw to the center and
commit suicide, answered : "I will believe it if the autopsy
was performed by Dr . Morgagni" (Klemperer, 1957) .
He started out to write De sedibus in order to update
Bonet's Sepulchretum, correct it, and add to it his own material . His book
. . . remains one of the imperishable books of medical
literature . Many authors previously had recorded the results of autopsy findings in an attempt to explain the
cause of death . But here, for the first time we find a vast
array of pathological findings, well arranged and indexed, each preceded by a minute history of the disease,
the symptoms present, the treatment employed, and finally a discussion of the relationship between the clinical
picture and the autopsy findings . Morgagni's knowledge
of the literature of the subject is apparent on every page,
where he discusses previous articles on the subject and
meticulously gives each author due credit for his own
observations . He often begins with Aristotle and reviews
the entire literature down to his own time .
The number of pathological states described by Morgagni, many of them for the first time, is enormous . He
described syphilitic aneurysms, acute yellow atrophy of
the liver, pneumonia with consolidation of the lungs,
meningitis due to acute otitis, hyperostosis frontalis, cancer of the stomach . . . . (Major, 1954, p . 587)
was published when Morgagni was 79 ; it was the
fruit of 60 years of devoted work . As Virchow said, he
introduced the "anatomical concept" into medicine . His work
profoundly influenced the next century of medicine .

De sedibus

Auenbrugger : The Discovery of
Percussion, 1761
Modern physical diagnosis began with the discovery of percussion by Leopold Auenbrugger in 1761 and its popularization by Jean Corvisart in 1808 . The concept of anatomic

9

localization of disease in the living patient originated with
the discovery of percussion, was given powerful impetus by
Laennec's stethoscope in 1816, and became firmly entrenched with the discovery of x-rays by Rontgen in 1895 .
Before Auenbrugger, physicians could not discover the
location of internal disease during the life of the patient .
Diagnostic methods, as illustrated by Boerhaave, were confined to the history, inspection at the bedside, taking the
pulse, and scrutinizing the excretions of the patient . The
stage for the "in vivo autopsy" was set by the contributions
of Vesalius and Sydenham . Clinical knowledge had grown
by slow accretion over the centuries since Galen by the efforts of the Arabs, by Boerhaave and his students, and by
other great clinicians . The beginnings of modern physiology had occurred with the demonstration of the circulation
by William Harvey (1628) . Morgagni had established pathologic anatomy and correlated autopsy findings with the
clinical history . But Morgagni's contributions had little value
in the face of the inability of the physician to ascertain the
state of diseased organs inside the patient during life . Auenbrugger conferred this ability upon the physician ; he "opened
up the world of the ear as a clinical instrument . Clinical
observation, though never blind, had been deaf ."
Leopold Auenbrugger (1722-1809) was born in Graz,
the son of an innkeeper . Legend has it that his discovery
of percussion was based upon observing his father tap wine
casks in order to ascertain the amount of wine present in
the cask . He studied medicine in Vienna under van Swieten,
whom he revered . Gerhard van Swieten was Boerhaave's
favorite student, and brought the latter's insistence upon
bedside teaching and the importance of the autopsy to Vienna, creating what was known as the Old Vienna School .
Upon graduation, Auenbrugger became physician to the
Spanish Hospital in Vienna . Although initially founded as
the hospital for citizens of Spain, Italy, and Holland, at the
time of Auenbrugger it was mostly a hospital for soldiers .
The discovery of percussion occurred during his years at
this hospital .
Auenbrugger published his New Invention by Means of
Percussing the Human Thorax for Detecting Signs of Obscure
Disease of the Interior of the Chest in 1761 . This 95-page book

was based upon seven years' experience with working out
the principles of percussion at the Spanish Hospital . The
book was published on New Year's Eve, 1760 . It begins as
follows :
I here present the reader with a new sign which I have
discovered for detecting diseases of the chest . This consists in percussion of the human thorax, whereby, according to the character of the particular sounds thence
elicited, an opinion is formed of the internal state of that
cavity . In making public my discoveries respecting this
matter, I have been actuated neither by an itch for writing, nor a fondness for speculation, but by the desire of
submitting to my brethren the fruits of seven years' observation and reflection . (Keele, 1963, p . 44)
Auenbrugger recommended that percussion be carried out
with the physician's hand gloved with unpolished leather
or that the patient's chest be covered by a tight-fitting shirt .
The patient was struck with the points of the extended
fingers held close together . This is known as direct, or immediate, percussion . The normal note "resembles the stifled
sound of a drum covered with a thick woolen cloth or other
envelope ." "If a sonorous region of the chest appears, on
percussion, entirely destitute of the natural sounds-that

10

1.

INTRODUCTION

is, if it yields only a sound like that of a fleshy limb when
struck-disease exists in that region ." He injected fluid into
the chests of cadavers and studied the percussion notes
produced . He percussed during inspiration, during expiration, and at the end of a full inspiration . He distinguished
four percussion notes (Jarcho, 1959) : normal, tympanitic,
dullness, and flatness . The percussion notes associated with
various thoracic diseases were outlined . He also listed diseases that could not be discovered by percussion . He described cardiac dullness to percussion, thereby outlining the
position of the heart in the chest .
Auenbrugger's book received unfavorable and even hostile reviews . It was apparently little noticed until Maximilian
Stoll became the leader of the Old Vienna School and used
percussion in the clinics . One of Stoll's pupils, Josef Eyerel,
wrote a paper on percussion that by chance was noticed by
the French clinician Corvisart, who was stimulated to obtain
a copy of Inventum Novum .
Jean Nicolas Corvisart (1755-182 1) was France's greatest
clinician during his time . He was born in the small village
of Dricourt in Champagne . He received his degree in Paris
in 1785 . He was a hard worker and inspiring teacher, and
by 1797 he was professor of practical medicine in the College de France, the highest teaching honor in France . He
was deeply interested in diseases of the heart, publishing in
1806 a remarkable book on cardiac disease . He classified
heart disease by anatomic structure (muscle, valves, endocardium, etc .), used the term "organic lesion," and distinguished between hypertrophy and dilation (Major, 1954) .
His fame and ability were such that he became Napoleon
Bonaparte's physician.
Corvisart recognized the value of Auenbrugger's work
and set about testing it on the wards . His technique differed
from Auenbrugger : he used the palmar surfaces of the
closely approximated and extended fingers . After twenty
years' experience with percussion, he published his findings
in 1808, together with an unabridged translation of Inventum Novum . Corvisart chose as the motto of his translation
Resonvere Cavae Cavernae : "the hollow cavities resounded"
(Buck, 1933) . This comes from the second book of Virgil's
Aeneid, where Laocoon threw his spear at the wooden horse,
with the result as described . The great prestige of Corvisart
immediately established percussion as an important physical
diagnosis tool . His revival of Auenbrugger's discovery and
the latter's resulting fame occurred just a year before Auenbrugger's death.
The next name in percussion is that of Pierre Adolphe
Piorry (1794-1879), who invented the pleximeter . He was
born in Poitiers and received his medical degree in Paris in
1816, studying under Corvisart . Piorry worshipped Laennec and desired to contribute something equally important
to medicine . The idea of the pleximeter is said to have come
to him once when, scratching himself due to pruritus, he
noted the sound made by the scratching . He scratched over
a coin, and, noted the louder sound thereby produced . He
went on to design a small plate, which he placed between
the percussing finger and the skin . He called this plate a
pleximeter (from the Greek words "to strike" and "to measure") . He felt this had the advantages of diminishing the
pain to the patient as well as improving the quality of sound .
His plate was ivory, 5 cm in diameter . Piorry used his fingers
to strike the pleximeter . English and American visitors started
using the fingers of the left hand as the pleximeter, and
Wintrich later introduced the percussion hammer (Bedford, 1971) . The hammer was later adopted for use as the

reflex hammer (see below) . The technique introduced by
Piorry is known as mediate percussion-that is, something
is between the finger and the skin .
A familiar and characteristic sight at his clinical demonstrations at the Pitie was Piorry sitting on a high stool,
which was moved from bed to bed, and by careful pleximetry he mapped out the patient's organs on the skin,
using coloured crayons, so that the patient's torso ended
up looking like a geographical map (Gueniot, 1927) . He
tried to convince observers that every organ had a special
percussion sound, and he played on his pleximeter like
a virtuoso on a musical instrument . He came to be known
as the "medical Paganini" (Ebstein, 1911) . There were
many anecdotes, no doubt fictitious, related about him,
such as that he paid a visit to the Royal Palace in the
Tuilleries and demanded to see the King, but was told
that the monarch was not in his reception room . Piorry
then decided to percuss the closed door with his pleximeter, detected a certain dull sound and diagnosed the
presence of the King in his chamber! (Monpart, 1902)
(Sakula, 1979, p . 578)

Laennec : The Stethoscope, 1816
The significance of the development of the stethoscope was
not merely that the sounds of the heart could be heard
clearly for the first time :
Laennec did more than discover auscultation, much more .
It was he who first sought and found the confirmation
of the clinical diagnosis at the autopsy table and united
pathological anatomy and clinical medicine by an inseparable bond . Morgagni had raised the question, what
changes are produced by the disease? Laennec went further and asked by what symptoms or signs are these
changes to be recognized during life? In answering this
question Laennec created local diagnosis (Naunyn) . (Pratt,

1935, p . 204)
Laennec not only "united pathological anatomy and clinical
medicine by an inseparable bond," but he singlehandedly
created a new discipline in medicine . Laennec had a mind
that had been prepared for the discovery of "mediate" auscultation (immediate auscultation is the listening to the body
directly ; mediate is listening to the body through another
object, such as the stethoscope) :
Laennec's De l'auscultation mediate was the product of three
years of the most intensive work with his new stethoscope
and, also, of more than 18 years of close study of problems in pathology and clinical medicine . It is far more
than a manual for the stethoscope. It is, also, a treatise
on diseases of the lung and of the heart, a mine of information on the clinical aspects of pulmonary and cardiac
disease, with an accurate description of the pathological
anatomy of these conditions . Laennec heard with his
stethoscope sounds never before heard or described and
for which no terms existed in medical literature . He was
the creator of a large number of words now currently
employed in physical diagnosis, such as rales, bronchophony, pectoriloquy and egophony . His book, unlike
Auenbrugger's Inventum Novum, did not wait 47 years for
recognition . It was immediately accepted as an epochmaking work, and auscultation was soon used in medical
clinics throughout the world . (Major, 1954, p . 662)

1.

THE ORIGINS OF THE HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

He was born at Quimper, France, in 1781 . On the death
of his mother, Laennec at age eight went to live with an
uncle who was a physician in Nantes . He began studying
medicine under this uncle at age 14 . In 1801 he went to
Paris and continued studying medicine under Corvisart,
receiving his degree in 1804 . He was fascinated by pathology . Laennec and his friend Bayle became assistants to Dupuytren, who was working on pathologic anatomy . Laennec
gained a reputation as an excellent pathologist as well as
being an excellent clinician . This interest led to the writing
of several papers on pathology .
He invented the stethoscope in 1816 . His friend Leju meau de Kergaradec wrote of the discovery:

The author told me himself, the great discovery which
has immortalized his name was due to chance . . . . One
day walking in the court of the Louvre, he saw some
children, who, with their ears glued to the two ends of
some long pieces of wood which transmitted the sound
of the little blows of the pins, struck at the opposite
end . . . . He conceived instantly the thought of applying
this to the study of diseases of the heart . On the morrow,
at his clinic at the Necker Hospital, he took a sheet of
paper, rolled it up, tied it with a string, making a central
canal which he then placed on a diseased heart . This was
the first stethoscope . (Major, 1954, pp . 661-62)
He apparently first used it on a fat young lady in whom
direct auscultation yielded no useful information . Laennec
had used direct auscultation for some years previously :
"Bayle was the first whom I saw employ it, when we followed
the service of Corvisart together ." Another comment about
direct auscultation : "As inconvenient for the physician as
for the patient, distaste alone renders it almost impracticable
in the hospital ; it cannot even be proposed to most women
and in most of them the volume of the breast is a physical
obstacle to its use" (Laennec as quoted by McKusick, 1958,
pp . 6-7) .
Laennec made his discovery in 1816 . The next three
years were years of intense work, as he perfected his technique at the Necker Hospital . In 1819 he published De
l'auscultation mediate (On Mediate Auscultation) . He named
the stethoscope for the Greek words meaning "to explore
the chest ." The book contains the symptoms, signs, clinical
course, and pathologic findings of a variety of diseases :
pulmonary edema, pneumonia, tuberculosis, emphysema,
pneumothorax, pleural effusion . The descriptions are compelling-for example, the sound he called egophony :
It appears as if a kind of silvery voice, of a sharper and
shriller tone than that of a patient, was vibrating on the
surface of the lungs, sounding more like the echo of the
voice than the voice itself . . . . It has, moreover, another
character, so constant as to lead me to derive from it the
appellation of the phenomenon-I mean a trembling or
bleating sound like the voice of a goat, a character which
is the more striking because the key or tone of it approaches that of this animal's voice . [Further egophony
is likened] to the nasal intonations of the juggler speaking
in the character of Punch . (Middleton, 1924, p . 436)
Laennec experimented with various stethoscope designs,
turning them all on the lathe himself . He finally settled on
one 45 cm long, 4 cm in diameter, with a plug that fitted
into it when listening to the heart . The instrument was made
more portable by fashioning it in two pieces . Each purchaser

11

of his book was presented with a stethoscope . Thayer maintained that at the time of Laennec's death from tuberculosis
in 1826 every stethoscope then in existence had been made
by him .
Students from all over the world flocked to study under
Laennec and to learn how to auscultate, returning to their
countries with stethoscopes . Laennec obviously had tuberculosis during this period, but worked indefatigably :
A good account of his work is given by C .J .B . Williams
(1884) who visited Paris in 1825-26 . Laennec demonstrated the signs obtained by auscultation in the wards
from 10 A .M . to noon, always speaking in Latin at the
bedside, after which he either gave a lecture in French
or attended a postmortem examination to correlate the
anatomical findings with the signs which had been elicited by auscultation. Williams took notes of the lectures
and made sketches of Laennec whom he described as a
frail-looking man of small stature who often became exhausted by his hospital duties . Laennec's own account of
his life in Paris was given in a letter to a colleague which
was published by Thayer (1920) . Rising at 7 :30 A .M ., he
gave consultations while dressing, then visited the Necker
Hospital, and rarely had time to return home for lunch
before setting out on his visits which lasted until 5 :30
P .M ., after which he took an early dinner and then set
out on another round of visits until 10 P .M ., eventually
retiring to bed at 11 P .M . (Bedford 1972, p . 1194)
Public acceptance of the stethoscope was such that within a
decade physicians felt they must use the stethoscope or else
jeopardize their reputation . Changes in the design of the
stethoscope appeared gradually . The first stethoscope that
was not rigid was built by Nicholas Comins, an Edinburgh
physician, in 1829 . Monaural instruments that were completely flexible appeared in the 1830s . The first satisfactory
binaural stethoscopes appeared in the 1850s . The fully flexible binaural stethoscope became generally used in the 1890s .
The diaphragm was added in the early 1900s .

Pierre Louis : The French School, 1800-1850
Paris was the mecca of the medical world from 1800 to 1850 .
Modern medicine began to emerge in France during this
fifty-year period . The leading clinicians of Paris were individuals such as Corvisart and Laennec . The list of luminaries included the surgeon Dupuytren (1777-1834) ; the
great pathologist Bichat (1771-1802), who succeeded to
Morgagni's mantle ; the pioneering psychiatrist Pinel (17551826) ; the gastroenterologist Broussais (1772-1838) ; Pierre
Louis ; and others . The Parisian medical community was the
shining light that attracted physicians from all over the world,
just as they were to go to Germany starting in the 1850s .
In the decade from 1830 alone, 222 American physicians
visited Paris for further study (Jones, 1973) . Medicine in
the United States was influenced profoundly by what has
come to be known as the French School.
The remarkable accomplishments of the French physicians did not come about by accident . For one thing, the
physicians and medicine did not exist in isolation . Paris was
a center of great activity from 1770 to 1800 in mathematics,
physics, chemistry, and biology . Progress in the physical
sciences carried over into other areas, such as medicine .
Another vital development was the rise of the hospital ;
this did not occur until the nineteenth century . Greek phy-

12

1.

INTRODUCTION

sicians focused upon the individual sickbed . Libraries were
the focus of medicine during the Middle Ages . The bedside
was the center of attention during the seventeenth century,
as Boerhaave taught in his 12-bed ward at Leyden . The
nineteenth century was the century of the hospital . The
tens of thousands of peasants who streamed into the capitals
of Europe with the coming of the Industrial Revolution
became sick with a host of acute infectious and chronic
diseases . Tuberculosis and typhoid fever were especially
prevalent, and attracted the interest of physicians and laypeople alike during this period . The emigres from the farms
to the cities were without urban roots or families, and consequently, when they became ill, the hospital was the only
place to go . The wards of the overcrowded hospitals provided clinical material in unprecedented quantity to the
physicians of the period . Physicians could apply for the type
of cases they wanted to see . Whereas Boerhaave's clinic had
12 beds, Bouillaud boasted of having seen 25,000 cases in
5 years (Ackerknecht, 1968) . In 1830 Paris had 30 hospitals
containing 20,000 patients . The Hotel-Dieu alone had 1000
beds . There were 5000 medical students . The political climate was favorable : Napoleon liked and encouraged physicians . Corvisart, the most influential physician of the period,
was Napoleon's personal physician .
Pierre-Charles Alexandre Louis (1787-1872) epitomized the best of French medicine during this period . Louis
was an inspiring teacher and masterful clinician . He was
the favorite of the American students who visited Paris during this time, and exerted an extraordinary influence upon
medicine along the Eastern seaboard in the United States .
Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr ., who studied under him : "[He
is] the object of our reverence, I might almost say idolatry ."
He was born in Aix, and received his medical degree in
Paris in 1813, at the age of 27 . He went to Russia with a
family friend and settled in Odessa to practice medicine .
William Osler describes what happened next :
In the last year of his stay in Odessa he was very much
disturbed by the high rate of mortality in children with
diphtheria, and this appears to have determined him to
abandon for a time the practice of medicine and to devote
himself to study . With this object in view he returned to
Paris and for six months attended the practice at the
Children's Hospital . Among the younger physicians in
Paris he found an old fellow-pupil, Chomel, physician to
La Charite, who offered him opportunities for work in
his wards . Louis at this time was thirty-four years of age .
Here for six years uninterruptedly he set himself to work
to study disease in the wards and in the post-mortem
room . At first he appears to have occupied the position
simply as a voluntary assistant and friend of Chomel, but
subsequently he became his chef-de-clinique, and during
this period he occupied a room in the entresol of the
hospital . He was a voluminous note-taker and collected
in this time an enormous number of important facts .
This remarkable feature in Louis' life has scarcely
been dwelt upon sufficiently . I know of no other parallel
instance in the history of medicine . It is worth reading
the brief extract from Dr . Cowan's introduction to his
translation of the work on Phthisis . "He entered the hospital of La Charite as a clinical clerk, under his friend,
Professor Chomel . For nearly seven years, including the
flower of his bodily and mental powers (from the age of
thirty-three to forty), he consecrated the whole of his
time and talents to rigorous, impartial observation . All
private practice was relinquished, and he allowed no considerations of personal emolument to interfere with the
resolution he had formed . . . . From this moment may

be dated the presence of that strong impression of the
necessity of exact observation by which the school of Paris
has been since so distinguished . . . . (Osler, 1897, p .
162)
Louis can be called the first full-time clinical investigator,
based on the five methods of approach that he employed
(Harvey, 1973) :

• Every effort was made to discover the previous state

•

•

•
•

of health of a patient : his age, occupation, residence,
family history, manner of living .
The present illness was sought in detail : its initial and
subsequent symptoms, the chronological order of occurrence, other symptoms .
The manifestations of the disease were sought in the
patient's statements and in the physician's examination .
A careful record was made of the clinical manifestations during the course of the illness .
If the patient died, an autopsy was obtained and a
meticulous record was made of the findings .

Louis established the systematic approach to the clinical case
that is in use today . This approach is given in detail below,
when Martinet's contributions are described . Louis was one
of the first to apply statistics to the study of medicine . His
early concern for cures, based on his experiences in Odessa,
caused him to turn his attention to therapeutics . It occurred
to him to list each case in numerical order, and to compare
the group receiving a certain therapy against the group that
did not . He used this method to demonstrate that bloodletting, which was quite popular in France at that time, was
of uncertain value in treating pneumonia . There were any
number of critics of this "numerical method ." Louis' reply
was that "in the difference between exactitude and vagueness, lies the difference between truth and error ."

Johannes Mueller : The German School,
1830-1900
By the 1840s the preeminence of French medicine began
to decline . A basic reason for this appears to be that the
French did not investigate the causes of disease . Their
strength was observation ; they distrusted experimental laboratory investigation (Ludmerer, 1985) . Hospital medicine,
with its complete dependence upon two techniques-clinical observation and the autopsy-had achieved its maximum potential . In order for clinical diagnosis to progress
further, the causes and mechanisms of diseases had to be
investigated . These investigations depended upon progress
in the fundamental medical and biological sciences : biochemistry, pathology, physiology, experimental pathology,
bacteriology, pharmacology . The mainstream development
of modern medicine shifted to Germany, where the focus
was upon the use of experimental methods to unravel the
mysteries of medicine :
Even though the amount of new medical knowledge uncovered by the laboratory approach was still small and
no major therapeutic innovations had yet been developed
using experimental techniques, the successes of German
medical science in the mid-nineteenth century created
great excitement . For the first time the causes of diseases
were being explained . This allowed an epistemological
shift of revolutionary proportions . It became clear to

1.

13

THE ORIGINS OF THE HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

knowledgeable physicians that experimental methods
could be applied to the study of disease and therapeutics
as well as to the study of the healthy state . Scientific
information no longer constituted curious knowledge,
irrelevant and diverting to the ordinary practitioner, but
now began to represent the core of what a modern doctor
needed to know . (Ludmerer, 1985, p . 31)
This shift in the destination of students of medicine is illustrated by the numbers : about 15,000 American physicians went to Germany, Switzerland, or Austria to study
between 1870 and 1914 . Most of this migration occurred
between the end of the Civil War and 1900 (Bonner, 1963) .
Germany's rise to scientific preeminence was made possible by the nature of the German university . There were
20 or more universities throughout the country, and nothing like them existed outside Germany . Science, including
medicine, existed side by side with all other disciplines . By
way of contrast, in England medicine was centered in the
London hospital schools, separate from the universities . The
organization of the German university was ideally suited for
furthering scientific research, including medical research .
The German university had freedom, flexible organization,
well-provided laboratories, and a free-flowing spirit of inquiry, all of which allowed Germany to become the undisputed center of scientific medicine (Ludmerer, 1985) .
Germany had achieved preeminence in other areas : the
social sciences, philosophy, linguistics, literary criticism . This
was in startling contrast to the Germany of the eighteenth
century, where higher learning was dominated by a philosophic system termed Naturphilosophie, a romantic philosophy of nature characterized by extensive speculations on
the essence of life and disease .
Johannes Mueller and his students were central figures
in the ascendancy of German scientific medicine . Mueller
(1801-1858) received his degree at Koblenz and studied
under Rudolphi, who convinced him that the future was in
the experimental method . Mueller was professor of anatomy and physiology at Bonn until the death of Rudolphi,
when he returned to Berlin as professor of anatomy, pathology, and physiology . He was both an eminent scientist
and an inspiring teacher . He authored over 200 monographs and articles, and made important contributions in
biology, embryology, comparative anatomy, physiology,
chemistry, psychology, and pathology . Between 1833 and
1840 he published Handbuch der Physiologie des Menschen ;
every statement in it was said to have been checked by Mueller's own experiments .

of new pathological information . Josef Skoda (1805-1881)
attained legendary skill in physical diagnosis . He published
Abhandlung ueber Perkussion and Auskultation in 1839 . "Medicine appeared to him as a chaos, a dismal swamp, out of
which rose up only two islands with a rich soil : pathological
anatomy and physical diagnosis" (Kussmaul, quoted by Major, 1954) . Hebra (1816-1880) and his pupil Kaposi were
the first dermatologists . Hebra published a book in 1846
that aspired to the classification of skin diseases on the basis
of pathologic anatomy ; for the first time pathology was
linked to dermatologic lesions . Semmelweis was also in Vienna at this time, and in 1847 promulgated the decree that
physicians who attended women in labor must first wash
their hands in a solution of calcium chloride-the first application of antisepsis in the history of medicine .

Helmholtz : The Ophthalmoscope, 1850

The eye is a dark chamber, and its entrance, the pupil, appears
black because the eye's dark purple lining absorbs all of the light
that reaches it.
-C . W . RUCKER

(1971)

This was the view of the eye that prevailed throughout
history until 1823 . At that time, John Purkinje, professor
of physiology at Breslau, Germany, described the "beautiful
orange glow" reflected from the pupil when light was thrown
into it from the right angle.
In 1847 the Viennese physiologist Ernst Brucke described the same phenomenon :

Mueller was the first of his line, his pupils bringing great
honor to their master as well as to themselves . Among
them were Schwann, Henle, du Bois-Reymond, Virchow
and Helmholtz, each a great man in his own right, who
had a powerful influence upon the later course of German and of world medicine, the germ of whose work we
usually find in some earlier experiment, thought, or stimulus of which Mueller was the father . (Major, 1954, p .
790)

A short time ago in the evening as I was standing between
the chandelier and the door in the auditorium of this
university, I saw a young man whose pupils were illuminated with a bright red light as he turned to close the
door through which he had just passed . This at once
reminded me that several persons had written accounts
of such illumination of the eyes . . . .
If one wishes to see this reflex in human eyes clearly
he should proceed in the following manner : Take the
usual oil lamp with its cylindrical wick and the glass chimney, as it is generally employed, but with the glass-shade
with its metal ring removed, and regulate the wick in
such fashion that it burns with a short, intense flame .
Then set the lamp close to you, but place the subject 8
to 10 feet away, sitting in such manner that his eyes are
at the same height as is the flame . Cover the flame with
a shade, bring your eyes at the same level with it and
look sharply towards the eyes of the subject . If he then
looks with widely opened lids towards the darkness adjacent to the lamp, or if he slowly moves his eyes to and
from, then the pupils will be illuminated with a reddish
light, while the iris, in contrast, will appear slightly greenish . (Rucker, 1971, pp . 12-13)

Vienna was also a great medical center in the second half
of the nineteenth century . Three men were the nucleus of
the New Vienna School, which was the successor to the
"Old" Vienna School of Auenbrugger's time . Rokitansky
(1804-1878) was one of the most productive pathologists
of all time : during the 48 years of his career he and his
assistants performed 59,786 autopsies! (Major, 1954) . His
Handbuch der pathologischen Anatomie (1842) was a gold mine

Brucke was almost at the point of inventing the ophthalmoscope, as Helmholtz wrote later : "Brucke himself was
but a hair's breadth away from the invention of the ophthalmoscope . He had only failed to ask himself what optical
image was formed by the rays reflected from the luminous
eye . Had it occurred to him, he was the man to answer it
just as quickly as I did and to invent the ophthalmoscope"
(quoted by Rucker, 1971, p . 13) .

14

I.

INTRODUCTION

Hermann von Helmholtz (1821-1894) invented the
ophthalmoscope . He was a precocious child, and early
showed great linguistic and mathematical ability . He wished
to study physics, but studied medicine because the family's
financial resources were limited . He came under the influence of Johannes Mueller . Helmholtz had this to say of
Mueller :
I recall my student days and the impression made upon
us by a man like Johannes Mueller, the physiologist . When
one feels himself in contact with a man of the first order,
the entire scale of his intellectual conception is modified
for life ; contact with such a man is perhaps the most
interesting thing life has to offer . (Major, 1954, p . 804)
Helmholtz received his medical degree in 1842 ; his thesis
described the anatomic connection between nerve cells and
nerves . An important early work in 1847 was one of the
great scientific papers of the nineteenth century : On the
conservation of energy . He demonstrated mathematically that
all forms of energy can be transformed from one form to
another, but energy cannot be created or destroyed .
In 1849 Helmholtz was appointed professor of physiology and pathology at the University of Konigsberg . In
this position he devoted time to teaching the physiology of
the sense organs, especially the eye . A central problem was
why the pupil was black under usual conditions, and under
other conditions was brilliant red and emitted light . This
was the problem, not the examination of the back of the
eye . The discovery of the ophthalmoscope was a by-product
of the solution of the emitted light problem . Helmholtz
found that the emitted light was simply reflected light . But
he went one step further than his predecessors, and analyzed how the emitted rays formed optical images (Rucker,
1971) . He perceived he could obtain an optical image of
the eye fundus by devising an instrument that would allow
his own eye to be placed in line with the light rays entering
and leaving the eye . He used three plates of glass, which
acted as a mirror to reflect light, but were still transparent
enough to see through . The first ophthalmoscope was composed of microscopic cover glasses and pieces of cardboard
glued together . At the age of 29 he became the first individual to see the retina in all its anatomic details : "Years
later, he said that had he not been theoretically convinced
that it must succeed he would not have persevered" (Rucker,
1971) . The announcement was made in a paper presented
by his friend Du Bois-Reymond, another student of Mueller, to the Berlin Physical Society on December 6, 1850 .
This paper was not published and was lost . However, on
December 17, 1850, Helmholtz wrote a letter to his father
as follows :
I have made a discovery during my lectures on the Physiology of the Sense-organs, which may be of the utmost
importance in ophthalmology . It was so obvious, requiring, moreover, no knowledge beyond the optics I learned
at the Gymnasium, that it seems almost ludicrous that I
and others should have been so slow as not to see it . It
is, namely, a combination of glasses, by means of which
it is possible to see the dark background of the eye, through
the pupil, without employing any dazzling light, and to
obtain a view of all the elements of the retina at once,
more exactly than one can see the external parts of the
eye without magnification, because the transparent media of the eye act like a lens with magnifying power of
twenty. The blood vessels are displayed in the neatest
way, with the branching arteries and veins, the entrance

of the optic nerve into the eye, &c . Till now a whole series
of most important eye-diseases, known collectively as black
cataract, have been terra incognita, because the changes
in the eye were practically unknown, both during life,
and, generally speaking, after death . My discovery makes
the minute investigation of the internal structures of the
eye a possibility . I have announced this very precious egg
of Columbus to the Physical Society at Berlin, as my property, and am now having an improved and more convenient instrument constructed to replace my pasteboard
affair. I shall examine as many patients as possible with
the chief oculist here, and then publish the matter .
(Rucker, 1971, pp . 23-25)
Helmholtz called his new instrument "Augenspiegel ." This
was the name of an instrument in use in Germany for some
time that consisted of a lens and a mirror for reflecting the
light. The instrument was used for examining the coats and
adnexa of the eye . This instrument was known in England
as an "eye speculum," in Holland as "oogspiegel," and in
France as "ophthalmoscope ." The word ophthalmoscope
was used to describe Helmholtz's instrument in the medical
literature for the first time in 1852 by Maressal de Marsilly
of Calais, France (Rucker, 1971) . The indirect method of
ophthalmoscopy was invented by Ruete in 1852 .
Practicing physicians did not appreciate the benefit of
the ophthalmoscope to any degree . Clifford Allbutt wrote
in 1871 : "The number of physicians who are working with
the ophthalmoscope today in England may, I believe, be
counted on the fingers of one hand ." Allbutt did much to
change this with his book On the Use of the Ophthalmoscope in
Diseases of the Nervous System and the Kidneys, published in
1871 .
Karl Wunderlich : The Thermometer, 1871
Thermoscopes, which indicate a change in temperature, have
existed in one form or another since antiquity . Thermometers, which measure the change on a scale, are a relatively
recent development . For many years it was believed that
body temperatures vary depending upon the climate . The
first problem posed in De Logistica Medica, a European book
on medical mathematics, in 1578, was : "To find the natural
degree of temperature of each man, as determined by his
age, the time of year, the elevation of the pole [that is, the
latitude] and other influences" (Boorstin, 1985) . Galileo invented a device that he called a "scherzino" (a little joke),
which used alcohol to measure changes in the temperature
of the air (Major, 1954) . Sanctorius (1561-1636), a colleague of Galileo at the University of Padua, is given credit
for introducing the thermoscope into medicine, although
his work had little or no influence at the time . The goal of
Sanctorius, following the dictates of Hippocrates, was to
determine if there was a change in the patient's temperature, thereby giving prognostic information . He modified
Galileo's thermoscope for use with a patient : "The patient
grasps the bulb, or breathes upon it into a hood, or takes
the bulb into his mouth, so that we can tell if the patient be
better or worse, so as not to be led astray in knowledge of
prognosis or cure."
Considerable progress was made in Florence in developing instruments for measuring temperature . At the Academia del Cimento, founded in 1657, thermoscopes were
sealed off from the atmospheric pressure, perhaps justifying for the first time the word "thermometer ." There was
no universally agreed upon scale for the measurement, how-

1.

THE ORIGINS OF THE HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

ever, and no consensus regarding a substance to use ; while
the Florentines used alcohol, Isaac Newton used linseed oil .
Boerhaave is said to have suggested to Fahrenheit that
mercury would be suitable for the fluid . Fahrenheit experimented with various scales before settling upon ice and
boiling water as the two fixed points ; by 1710 he had determined that axillary temperature is 96 degrees (Keele,
1963) . Boerhaave used it as a research instrument on his
12 beds at Leyden . Anton de Haen, one of Boerhaave's
pupils who became a leader of the Old Vienna School, introduced thermometry into the practice and teaching of
medicine, according to Wunderlich . De Haen left the thermometer in for 71/2 minutes, and then added 1 or 2 degrees
Fahrenheit to the registered temperature . "He was aware
of the morning remission and evening exacerbation of temperatures ; of the rise of temperature during the febrile
rigor ; of the persistence of fever-temperatures after intermittent fevers have apparently been cured ; and of the discrepancies between pulse and temperature in some patients
and in certain diseases" (Wunderlich, 1871) . However, de
Haen's work with temperature was neglected after his death .
Celsius in 1742 divided the scale into 100 degrees, taking
zero as the boiling point of water, and 100 as the melting
point of ice ; this was inverted by Christin a year later . Clinical thermometers were well known by the 1750s . By 1777
John Hunter was writing (to Jenner) that the temperature
under the human tongue was 97 degrees in all countries .
Ludwig Traube in Berlin in 1850 suggested to Wunderlich
a systematic study of temperatures in human beings .
Carl August Wunderlich (1815-1877) was professor of
medicine at Leipzig . In 1871 he published Medical Thermometry and Human Temperature, in which he had assembled
information on 25,000 patients . The classic temperature
patterns of many diseases, such as typhoid, were depicted .
From the preface :
For the last sixteen years my attention has been uninterruptedly directed to the course pursued by the temperature in diseases of various kinds . I have gradually brought
together a mass of notes which comprises many thousand
complete cases of thermometric observations of diseases,
and millions of separate readings of the temperature .
The more my observations multiplied the more firm my
conviction was of the value of this method of investigation . And though theoretical questions as to human temperature and kindred subjects must not be overlooked,
my purpose has been to prepare from these notes a practical book .
A knowledge of the course of temperature in disease
is indispensable to medical practitioners .
Because : all the phenomena of the sick are deserving
of study . The temperature may be determined with a
nicety which is common to few other phenomena . The
temperature can neither be feigned nor falsified . We may
conclude the presence of some disturbance in the economy from the mere fact of altered temperature . . . .
Wunderlich's book established the fundamental importance
of the measurement of temperature in clinical medicine .

Erb and Westphal : The Reflex Hammer, 1875
Clinicians had described a number of neurologic reflexes
before 1875 : the pupillary light reflex ; absence of a blink
reflex in Bell's palsy ; the grasp reflex ; flexion of a spastic
leg upon stroking the sole . These were generally accounted

15

to be protective in nature . In 1875 William Erb reported
for the first time on the elicitation and significance of the
deep tendon reflexes using a reflex hammer :
Slightly flexed at the hip and knee, the leg is held fast
while all its muscles are relaxed and, with a finger or
percussion hammer, a very light and elastic tap is delivered (exactly as in very light and elastic percussion of the
chest or in testing for fluid in the abdomen) to the region
of the ligamentum patellae . Each tap is followed by a
contraction of the quadriceps, immediate like lightning,
unmistakable, visible, palpable, and apparently reflex :
manifestly and often quite strongly is the shank set in
motion . It is extraordinarily difficult to suppress this reflex by a voluntary effort. . . . (Schiller, 1967, p. 75)
Erb had been testing this reflex for some years, finding it
of diagnostic significance in diseases of the spinal cord :
"much more exquisitely brisk in many patients with diseases
of the spinal cord ." Ankle clonus had been described previously by Charcot in spinal cord disease, but Erb made it
clear that his reflex was different . His paper was titled "On
the Tendon Reflexes in Health and in Diseases of the Spinal
Cord ."
In the same issue of the Archiv fair Psychiatrie and Nervenkrankheiten there appeared another paper dealing with
the same reflex, written by the editor of the journal, Carl
Westphal . Westphal had an explanatory footnote at the bottom of the first page . He had been astonished to receive a
paper from Erb dealing with the same facts that he himself
was about to publish . He, too, had been testing the reflex
for several years, and his observations agreed with those of
Erb . He had gotten Erb's permission for the two papers to
appear side by side :
Erb and Westphal had hit upon the unique spot in the
body where scientific purity and simplicity reign because
only two neurons are involved in the reflex . They had
struck a source of untapped knowledge-knowledge that
previous generations of physiologists would have found
useless . The source turned into "a sea of names and
claims," a flood of reflexes . . . . (Schiller, 1967, p . 82)
The hammer used to elicit the reflex had been developed
for percussing the chest . The idea for the percussion hammer apparently came from Gerhard van Swieten, of the Old
Vienna School . Van Swieten in turn credited the idea to a
Swiss physician of the preceding century, Johann Jacob
Wepfer (1620-1695) . Wepfer got the idea from cowherdsmen who diagnosed echinococcal and cysticercoid cysts of
the brain by systematically hitting the animal's head with a
mallet, and trephining any area that resonated (Schiller,
1967) . The story thus comes full circle : an instrument initially used for neurological diagnosis in cows and sheep was
used in chest diseases in humans and then again in neurology .
Gowers termed the reflex the "knee jerk" in 1879, and
for decades it was the only reflex that was tested routinely .
In Gowers's text of 1886 he listed the ankle jerk, but made
no mention of its absence in sciatica . The jaw jerk was described by Beevor in 1885 .
Just as the numbers of reflexes grew exponentially, so
did the instruments used for eliciting the tendon jerks as
well as percussing the chest. Gowers used his stethoscope
to elicit them . J . Madison Taylor had invented the triangular
hammer, so widely used today, by 1890 . In the mecca of
neurology, Queen Square in London, around 1925 a Miss

16

1.

INTRODUCTION

Wintle "hit upon the happy device of fitting a ring pessary
to a solid brass wheel, and mounting this upon a stick of
bamboo . The result was a heavy, springy, and completely
painless hammer . . ." (Critchley, quoted in Schiller, 1967) .

literate the radial pulse (Keele, 1963) . Ritter von Basch used
a water-filled rubber bulb attached to a manometer (1881),
and later an aneroid barometer . Potain used air in the arm
band, and attached the aneroid barometer . In 1896 Riva
Rocci published the method in use today of employing a
rubber air-filled bladder and a mercury manometer .

Riva Rocci : The Sphygmomanometer, 1896
The first measurement of blood pressure was by the Reverend Stephen Hales in about 1733 . Hales was a clergyman,
educated at Cambridge, with an enduring interest in science . He is considered the founder of plant physiology, as
well as the father of hemodynamics . His measurement of
the blood pressure was the first major advance in circulatory
physiology since Harvey's demonstration of the circulation
of blood . Hales was led to his experiments by his interest
in the forces that lead to muscular contraction . The wisdom
of the time was that the force of the blood during systole
caused a dilation of the vessels, which caused the contraction . After he "read the unsatisfactory Conjectures of several [writers] about the Cause of muscular Motion [it occurred
to me] that by fixing Tubes to the Arteries of live Animals,
I might find pretty nearly, whether the Blood by its meer
hydraulick Energy, could have a sufficient Force, by dilating
the Fibres of the acting Muscles, and thereby shortening
their Lengths, to produce the great Effects of muscular
Motion" (quoted in Cohen, 1976, p . 99) . He tied a horse
on its back, and laid open the crural artery, and then :
I inserted into it [the artery] a brass pipe whose bore was
1/6th inch in diameter ; and to that by means of another
brass pipe which was fitly adapted to it I fixed a glass
tube of nearly the same diameter which was 9 ft. in length .
Then, tying the ligature on the artery the blood rose in
the tube 8 ft . 3 inches perpendicular above the level of
the left ventricle of the heart . (Quoted in Keele, 1963,
p . 75)
The jugular pressure he found to be 12 inches when the
horse was quiet and 52 inches when it struggled . He estimated human blood pressure to be 7 .5 feet, which is fairly
close . Hales also calculated the mean velocity of the blood
in the aorta, the velocity of the systolic output, and the
diastolic pressure .
Hales gratified his scientific passion while serving as the
rector of the Church of St . Mary's-in-the-Meadows at Teddington . His close friends, including the poet Alexander
Pope, observed that Hales looked upon wicked individuals
without indignation, "not from want of discernment or sensibility ; but he used to consider them only as those experiments, which, upon trial, he found could never be applied
to any useful purpose, and which he therefore calmly and
dispassionately laid aside ." One surmises that scientific detachment pervaded the entirety of Reverend Hales's life .
Johannes Mueller (see above) remarked that the discovery
of blood pressure "was even more important than discovery
of the circulation of the blood ."
One hundred years later (1828), Poiseuille substituted a
mercury manometer for Hales's glass tube (Keele, 1963) .
Potassium carbonate was used as an anticoagulant . Ludwig
added a float recorder and kymograph in 1847, thus making
possible physiological experiments involving the blood pressure .
Measuring arterial pressure directly was obviously unsuitable clinically. Vierordt in 1855 attempted to measure
blood pressure by determining the weight necessary to ob-

The Clinical History
The Greeks were aware of the necessity of a clinical history,
as illustrated by the quotation from Hippocrates at the beginning of this chapter . Rufus (or Ruphos) of Ephesus wrote
what is apparently the first formal document solely about
the history : On the Interrogation of the Patient . Very little is
known about Rufus . He lived around A .D . 100 . Galen spoke
admiringly of him . He is thought to have studied and practiced in Rome, although this is not certain . He wrote a
number of other books that were esteemed by his contemporaries and later Arabian physicians : On the Names of Var-

ious Parts of the Body ; Treatise on the Pulse ; Treatise on Diseases
of the Kidneys and of the Bladder . His statements about the
history are really remarkable :
It is important to ask questions of patients because with
the help of these questions one will know more exactly
some of the things that concern the disease and one will
treat the disease better . One should start by interrogating
the patient himself . One will learn just how sane or troubled the patient is and the degree of strength or weakness
of the patient . One will obtain a certain notion of the
disease process and of the body site affected . One can
conclude that the spirit and mind are in good shape if
the patient responds in a suitable manner with a faithful
memory . . . . It is a sign of delirium if you ask one
question of the patient and he replies with another, or
forgets what he is saying when he talks . . . . The physician will interrogate the patient first, and then question
the relatives and friends, especially if he cannot learn
from the patient himself. . . . It is important at the beginning to find out precisely when the disease process
began . . . . You will ask about the rapidity and manifestations of the disease-whether the damaging phenomena develop rapidly, or on the contrary arrive and
progress slowly . . . . Ask if the disease has been present
in the same patient previously . . . . I believe it is important to be informed of the nature of the disease in
each individual patient, because we are not all formed in
the same fashion, but we differ markedly from one another in many respects. (Quoted in R . D'Ephese, 1879)
Rufus cites a contemporary who feels it is completely unnecessary for the physician to question the patient . Rufus
feels this is in error : "The physician will be instructed and
wiser about the patient if he interrogates the patient ." Rufus
writes at length about what to him are important aspects of
the history : nourishment ; habits ; season of the year when
the disease began ; sleep habits ; content of dreams ; medications and regimens the patient has been subjected to ; a
full characterization of the location and nature of pains ;
types of food eaten and location of water drunk by the
patient. In short, Rufus demonstrates an approach to history taking that is truly extraordinary for his time .
The modern view of the history probably began with the
French School of Corvisart, Laennec, Louis, and Andral
(Keele, 1963) . They are responsible, as nearly as can be told,
for what might be termed the modern clinical method .

1.

THE ORIGINS OF THE HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Boerhaave exemplified the best up until the time of the
French ; as noted previously, he made rounds with his students on 12 beds each day, questioning and inspecting the
patient, examining the urine and feces, and going to the
autopsy table if the patient died . The next great step was
that of the French School, exemplified by Martinet . Louis
Martinet (1795-1875) in 1827 published A Manual of Pathology containing the symptoms, diagnosis and Morbid Characters
of Diseases, together with an exposition of the different Methods of
Examination applicable to the affections of the Head, Chest, and
Abdomen . In his preface Martinet states that he intends his
book as a clinical guide, containing "a brief statement of the
necessary requisites for the proper conduct of clinical pursuits ."
Martinet's clinical examination scheme fills seventy-four
pages of this small book. Martinet begins his book with an
"Exposition of the Various Methods of Examination Used
in Medicine ." Selected quotations :
It is at the bedside of the patient that the observer must
study disease ; there he will see it in its true character,
stripped of those false shades by which it is so frequently
disguised in books .
The physician should be calm and conciliating, should
hear with attention the communications which his patients make, should put his questions to them with mildness, listen kindly to their complaints, and never fail to
demonstrate an active interest in their welfare .
In drawing up a case, it should always be recollected that
it is done with the view to convey to others an exact
representation of the facts which we have observed . . . .
The report of a case should be like the copy of a picture .
The leading symptoms, particularly those which serve to
establish the diagnosis, should first be noted down, ranged
according to their importance, reference always being
made, as far as can be done, to the order of their appearance .
It may, however, be sometimes useful to note the absence
of any particular symptoms, which usually exist in similar
cases, lest the omission may be attributed to negligence
or forgetfulness on the part of the observer, and so discredit be cast on the facts he has detailed .
The observations should be transcribed immediately after
the visit, in a book kept for the purpose, as being the
only means of ensuring correctness in the statements .
When commencing to take down a case, first note the
name, sex, age, and occupation of the patient ; this should
be done according to the form above given . In some cases
it becomes necessary to state the country or district from
which the patient comes, and the diseases which prevail
there .
The acute and chronic forms of disease require a plan
of examination and narration altogether different .
Everything connected with the previous history should
be known, and stated fully in chronic cases ; it is the only
means of throwing any light on the obscurity which so
generally surrounds them . But in acute cases this is far
less necessary . (Martinet, from Quain's translation, 1827)
Martinet's history begins with taking the full history as
applicable to all diseases ; he then uses special methods for
the "three great cavities" of the body-the brain, chest, and
abdomen (Keele, 1963) . After the history comes the physical
examination . The stethoscope is used before percussion on

17

the chest . Inspection, percussion, palpation, and auscultation are used systematically for the chest, head, and abdomen . Rectal examination is performed to detect prostatic
enlargement . The skin, muscles, nerves, mucous and synovial membranes, lymphatics, and veins are noted specifically .
Martinet's remarks could fit with ease into a modern
physical diagnosis book . His scheme illustrates the clinical
method as developed by the great clinicians of the French
School .
An interesting contrast to Martinet's methods are those
of Peter Latham at St . Bartholomew's Hospital . He writes,
in 1836 : "The patient being placed before me, I ask him
no question until I have learned everything worthy of remark which my own eyes can inform me of . . ." (from
Keele, 1963, p . 55) .
Comments in the literature about history taking are quite
sparse for the next century . G . L . Engel has this to say about
the meagerness of the historical record :
I am not particularly bothered that the record is as sparse
as it is. . . . Eliciting historical accounts of the experiences of others as a means of gaining knowledge is, of
course, as old as man . It is also quintessentially human
and is after all one of the ways we learn from early childhood on, that is, from the stories that others have to tell
about that which is not known or is unfamiliar to us . It
is for this reason, I suspect, that the process of "history
taking" has not until very recently been thought of as
anything that needed to be taught or even studied, much
less as a scientific method . Yet, if science, and being scientific, represent man's most persistent effort to extend
and organize knowledge by reasoned efforts that ultimately depend on evidence that can be consensually validated, as Charles Odegaard has said, then "history-taking"
(or interviewing) does qualify as a scientific method . Even
Rufus of Ephesus appeared to know that intuitively. Thus,
he recommends asking questions in order that physicians
"know more exactly some of the things that concern the
disease" ; a suitable manner of patient response is "with
a faithful memory" ; he recommends verification by questioning relatives and friends ; advises that the physician
"find out precisely ." Therein is captured the essence of
science in the human realm of history-taking, a perspective disregarded in this era dominated by the biomedical
model . (Engel, personal communication, 1988)
Stoeckle and Billings have surveyed the history of the
medical interview in the United States since the beginning
of the twentieth century . Inferences about the history can
be obtained from hospital records . Examples from Richard
Cabot's Case Teaching in Medicine (1905) illustrate detailed
histories, with one or two lines regarding the patient's social
circumstances (Stoeckle and Billings, 1987) . From 1900 to
the 1940s in the United States, as well as elsewhere, there
were no instructional texts on history taking . Teaching was
by senior physicians acting as role models at the bedside .
With rare exceptions, there were no verbatim accounts of
the history, and students themselves were rarely if ever
actually observed or critiqued doing a history . Didactic material on what to ask was found, albeit sparsely, in physical
diagnosis texts and manuals on the physical examination .
Questions given as examples were highly specific : "Have
you ever had tuberculosis?" There was circumscribed attention to social circumstances .
After Martinet, the next real advance in history taking
came with the publication of The Clinical Interview by Felix

18

1.

INTRODUCTION

Deutsch and William Murphy in 1954 . The book was based
in part upon reviewing transcribed tapes of psychiatric resident interviews of patients over a period of 16 years . The
process of the interview received detailed attention :
If the examiner allows [the patient] to talk without asking
leading questions or answering his questions, the patient
will usually give a detailed account of his complaints and
ideas about his illness . Having exhausted his ideas and
recollections regarding his organic disturbances, he will
stop and wait to be asked a question . The examiner waits
until he feels that the patient will not continue spontaneously, and he then repeats one of the points in the
patient's last sentence in an interrogative form. Usually
the therapist repeats one of the somatic complaints last
mentioned, being careful to use the same wording as the
patient . The patient then as a rule gives new information
centering around his symptoms and is stimulated to further associations . (P. 20)
Deutsch and Murphy termed this method associative anamnesis, or associative exploration . Medical students began
to be taught this method, notably beginning with the course
in Clinical Methods designed and used at the University of
Rochester by Morgan and Engel . Their text introduced the
method to other medical schools (see Morgan and Engel,
1969) .
The Rochester course and text represent a landmark in
history taking and in the approach to the patient . The book
is the first text on clinical skills that approaches the history
and interviewing differently from what had been so long a
tradition of neglect . The biopsychosocial concept, as articulated by Engel (1977), has now become the standard approach to the history .

Clinical Methods in the United States
The spread and refinement of the history and physical examination in the United States followed the development
of medical education . This development has been the subject of a recent book by Ludmerer . The outline below follows his excellent account .
The Civil War pointed up with brutal clarity the deficiencies of American physicians . One estimate is that 110,000
Union soldiers died from wounds and 225,000 from disease ; 50,000 Confederate soldiers died from wounds and
150,000 from disease! Percussion was performed by only a
small portion of physicians . Very few used the thermometer . Stethoscopes were rarely used . Large doses of laxatives
and emetics were given for therapy . The U .S . government
finally required that each physician entering the army or
navy pass a compulsory examination : barely 25% passed .
The U .S . physician of this time was a product of the
medical education system of several dozen proprietary and
a few university schools . Admission requirements consisted
of one question : Can the applicant pay the fees? Instruction
was almost totally didactic ; anatomy was taught without benefit of dissection . The faculty of a typical proprietary school
was composed of six to eight professors . The pervasive spirit
was commercialism, with the teachers sharing the spoils of
what was left of student tuition after expenses were paid .
There were some bright spots . Alternatives and supplements available included apprenticeship, being a house pupil
in a hospital, additional work during the summer by extramural non-degree-granting schools, and by going to Europe-especially France-as has been described above .

There was a profound skepticism toward medical science
and experimentation among American physicians from 1800
until the last half of the century . This reflected the influence
of the French School . The laboratory sciences were distrusted . In 1832 American physicians who had studied in
France founded the Society for Medical Observation . By
way of contrast, American physicians influenced by study
in Germany founded in 1908 the American Society for Clinical Investigation . This attitude against research profoundly
influenced medical education until beyond the Civil War .
It is illustrated by the fact that at no medical school in the
1860s did research constitute a part of a faculty member's
responsibilities (Ludmerer, 1985) . The faculty lectured and
administrated on the school's time, and saw private patients
on their own time .
An extraordinary change occurred between 1850 and
1890 : American physicians journeyed to Germany for their
postgraduate education . As noted earlier, 15,000 went between 1870 and 1914 . The physicians who went to Germany
had to have significant means : a spartan living cost $900 a
year . Consequently they were young, male, from the East
Coast, and the upper strata of society (Ludmerer, 1985) .
They took one of two paths . They gained practical experience in the newly developing specialties of ophthalmology,
dermatology, laryngology, obstetrics, and surgery, and then
came home to go into private practice . This group-estimated to be some 10,000 of the number cited above-mostly
went to Vienna, where the New Vienna School provided
exceptional clinical opportunities . A smaller group went to
study the fundamental medical sciences . These people came
back to America and became the leaders in American medicine until well in the 1940s : William Welch, Franklin Mall,
Henry Bowditch, etc . When these individuals returned, they
were frustrated beyond measure because America simply
had nothing comparable to the German university .
A development that fortunately paralleled the return
from Germany of these individuals was the emergence of
the American university between 1865 and 1890 . "After the
Civil War, the old-fashioned college evolved into the modern university . At the root of this transformation was the
astounding growth of information that occurred in all scholarly fields" (Ludmerer, 1985) . Professional schools, including medicine, moved into the universities . The presidents
of these universities, for a variety of reasons, vigorously
promoted the welfare of their medical schools . "To university leaders, research and teaching in medicine carried
a special imperative, for such work offered the hope of
better diagnosis and treatment of disease" (Ludmerer, 1985) .
Between 1871 and 1893 these two forces, the Germantrained physicians and ascendance of the university, acted
to produce a profound change in American medical education at four universities : Harvard, Pennsylvania, Michigan, and Johns Hopkins .
At Harvard, Charles Eliot became president in 1870 . He
was a chemist who had worked in the laboratory and spent
time abroad in Germany . He felt deeply the need to teach
science with laboratories . He had a poor view of medical
education : "The ignorance and general incompetency of
the average graduate of American Medical Schools, at the
time he receives the degree which turns him loose upon the
community, is something horrible to contemplate ." His
strong views on the need to reform medical education met
with resistance and hostility on the part of the older faculty .
In November 1869, Eliot took the unprecedented step
of assuming the chair at a meeting of the medical faculty,
a seat he did not relinquish for the next forty years . No

1.

19

THE ORIGINS OF THE HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

other event more dramatically symbolized the desire of
the modern university to take charge of medical education . With the support of his faculty allies, Eliot tried
to push through his ideas of reforming the medical school .
For a year, as the two factions locked horns, the faculty
was torn with strife . This was no conflict between elite
and ordinary physicians but a civil war within the ranks
of the elite . A deep chasm divided those with French
from those with German views of medical science, providing a microcosm of the conflict besetting the elite medical community throughout America . (Ludmerer, 1985,
p . 50)
Eliot pushed through his ideas successfully, and in 1871
appointed Henry Bowditch, just back from Ludwig's laboratory in Germany, as the faculty member in physiology .
Bowditch was the first medical professor in America to be
full-time in teaching and research . The laboratory became
the seat for teaching a greatly expanded basic science curriculum . This focus upon the laboratory fostered a new
educational philosophy : "the primary goal of medical education, in the eyes of the Harvard faculty, was not to provide students an encyclopedic knowledge of facts but to
foster the student's ability to think critically, to solve problems, to acquire new information, to keep up with the
changing times . This could best be done in the laboratory
rather than in the lecture hall" (Ludmerer, 1985, p . 52) .
The University of Pennsylvania medical school underwent similar reforms in 1877, followed closely by the University of Michigan . The reforms in these three schools set
the stage for the most extraordinary development of all :
the opening of the Johns Hopkins Medical School in 1893 .
This new medical school embodied astonishing innovations
from its inception : strict admission requirements for students ; two years of rigorous basic science training with plentiful laboratory experience ; two years of clinical experience
at the hospital bedside ; a faculty chosen solely for their
teaching and research ability ; a view that research was one
of its high priorities .
The acquisition of William Osler as professor and head
of medicine at the Johns Hopkins Medical School was of
the highest importance in the development of medical education and the foundation of clinical work as a science in
the United States . In this one man there was a confluence
of all the forces described earlier in this chapter : an appreciation of the importance of the laboratory and research ;
a reverence for the clinical greats who had laid the foundations of physical diagnosis-Auenbrugger, Laennec,
Louis ; a solid foundation in pathology. "His training and
historical interest had given him the knowledge and perspective to incorporate in one medical educational setting
all that the heritage of medicine had slowly and painfully
evolved up to that time" (Harvey, 1973) .
The medical clinic instructional model that Osler put into
effect revolutionized medical teaching in the art and science
of diagnosis and patient care . There were three aspects to
the clinic . There was a live-in resident staff with graded
experience : from the new graduate to more senior residents
of several years' experience . Instruction in methods of history taking and physical diagnosis was emphasized to a degree not seen since Louis . Medical students became actual
members of the patient care team, taking histories, doing
physicals, doing the laboratory work, and making rounds
with the residents and faculty . Thus evolved the medical
clerkship, which was extended to surgery, obstetrics and
gynecology . This clerkship did for the clinical students what
laboratory work did for the scientists .

Table 1 .3
Biographical Vignettes of Individuals in the Sections of
This Book
Section
1 . Introduction
2 . Cardiovascular

3 . Pulmonary
4 . Neurological
5 . Autonomic Nervous
System
6. Gastrointestinal
7. Skin
8. Eye
9 . ENT

10 .
11 .
12 .
13 .

Endocrine
Hematopoietic
Musculoskeletal
Female Genitalia

14 . Genitourinary
15 . Psychiatric
16 . General
17 . Special Groups

Vignette
The Case of Richard Cabot
Herrick and Heart Disease
Trudeau at Lake Saranac
Weir Mitchell of Philadelphia
Cannon of Harvard
William Beaumont : The Man and
the Opportunity
Goldberger and the Mal de la Rosa
The Doctors Friedenwald
The Controversial Horace Green
Fuller Albright
The Castle Approach
Hench at the Mayo Clinic
The Collaboration of Kelly and
Broedel
On the Autobiography of Hugh
Young
The Interpersonal Theory of Harry
Stack Sullivan
Osler and the Case Study
Engel and the Concept of Disease

"From the proprietary schools of the Civil War to the
Johns Hopkins Medical School of 1893, the teaching of
medicine had changed dramatically" (Ludmerer, 1985) .
Three basic changes had occurred : the curriculum was more
rigorous ; many new subjects were added ; the student became an active participant rather than a passive observer .
The biographical vignettes beginning each section of this
book take up where this chapter leaves off. These vignettes
present individuals who have made seminal contributions
to clinical diagnosis in the United States . They are listed in
Table 1 .3 .

Conclusion
This chapter has traced the stages in the knowledge and
forces that have shaped the modern history and physical
examination . As stated in the beginning, this has been a
story of scholarship largely achieved by physicians going
about the daily work of delivering patient care . They serve
to stimulate us "to rise above the routines of the daily ward
round . . .

References
Ackerknecht EH . A short history of medicine . New York : Ronald
Press, 1968 .
Albert DM, Miller WH . Jan Purkinje and the ophthalmoscope . Am
J Ophthal 1973 ;76 :494-99 .
Allbutt TC . On the use of the ophthalmoscope in diseases of the
nervous system and the kidneys . Rhode Island Med J
1960 ;43 :107-11 .

Andrews JL, Badger TL . Lung sounds through the ages. JAMA
1979 ;241 :2625-30 .

Balfour GW. On the evolution of cardiac diagnosis from Harvey's
days till now . Edinburgh Med J 1887 ;32 :1065-81 .

20

1.

INTRODUCTION

Bedford DE . Auenbrugger's contribution to cardiology ; history of
percussion of the heart. Br Heart J 1971 ;33 :817-21 .
Bedford DE . Cardiology in the days of Laennec . Br Heart J
1972 ;34 :1193-98 .
Benison S . Celebration and history : the centenary of Robert Koch's
discovery of the tubercle bacillus . Bull Hist Med 1982 ;56 :15759 .
Bonner T . American doctors and German universities : a chapter
in international intellectual relations, 1870-1914 . Lincoln : University of Nebraska Press, 1963 .
Boorstin DJ . The discoverers . New York : Vintage Books, 1985 .
Buck RW . Physical diagnosis prior to Auenbrugger . N Eng J Med
1933 ;209 :239-41 .
Buzzi A. Piorry on percussion of the heart . Am J Cardiol 1960 ;5 :7035.
Chamberlain EN, Ogilvie C . The foundations of our art . In : Symptoms and signs in clinical medicine . 9th ed . Chicago : John Wright
& Sons, 1974 .
Cohen IB . Stephen Hales . Sci Am 1976 ;234(5) :98-107 .
Copeland DD . Concepts of disease and diagnosis . In : Perspectives
in biology and medicine . Chicago : University of Chicago Press,
1976/77 ;20 :528-38 .
Davis AB . Life Insurance and the physical examination : a chapter
in the rise of American medical technology . Bull Hist Med
1981 ;55 :392-406 .
Delp MH, Manning RT . Major's physical diagnosis . 9th ed . WB
Saunders, 1981 :1-11 .
d'Ephese R . De l'interrogatoire des malades . In : Oeuvres de Rufus
d'Ephese . Paris : Imprimerie Nationale, 1879 :196-218 .
Deutsch F, Murphy WF . The application of psychoanalytic concepts
to resident training and the technique of the therapeutic interview . In : The clinical interview . New York : International Universities Press, 1955 ;1 :14-30 .
Engel GL . The need for a new medical model : a challenge for
biomedicine . Science 1977 ;196 :129-36 .
Engle RL. Medical diagnosis : present, past, and future . Arch Intern
Med 1963 ;112 :520-29 .
Faber KH . Nosography in modern internal medicine . New York :
Paul B . Hoeber, 1923 .
Feinstein AR . An analysis of diagnostic reasoning, 1 . The domains
and disorders of clinical macrobiology . Yale J Biol Med
1973 ;46 :212-32 .
Fye WB . Why a physiologist?-the case of Henry P . Bowditch . Bull
Hist Med 1982 ;56 :19-29 .
Garrison FH . An introduction to the history of medicine . 4th ed .
Philadelphia : WB Saunders, 1929 .
Gordon BL . Medicine throughout antiquity . Philadelphia: FA Davis,
1949.
Graham D . The teaching of physical diagnosis . Bull Assoc Am Med
Coll 1928 ;3 :115-19 .
Granville JM . Percussion as a therapeutic agent in nervous diseases .
Br Med J March 11, 1882 :339-40 .
Harvey AM . Our medical heritage : some examples of creative
scholarship . Phar Alpha Omega Alpha 1973 ;36 :122-28 .
Herrick JB . Some features of present day diagnosis . JAMA
1938 ;111 :981-86 .
Herrick JB . Modern diagnosis . JAMA 1929 ;92 :518-22 .
Holmes FL. Claude Bernard and animal chemistry : the emergence
of a scientist . Harvard : University Press Cambridge, 1974 .
Jarcho S . Observations on the history of physical diagnosis : Hippocrates, Auenbrugger, Laennec . J Intern Coll Surg
1959 ;31 :717-25 .
Jarcho S . Morgagni, Vicarius, and the difficulty of clinical diagnosis .
In : Stevenson LG, Multhauf RB, eds . Medicine science and
culture, historical essays in honor of Owsei Temkin . Baltimore :
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1968 :87-95 .
Jarcho S . Jacob Bigelow on physical diagnosis (1839) . Am J Cardiol
1969 ;23 :446-52 .
Jarcho S . Experiments on heart valves (1908) by Harvey Cushing
and JRB Branch. Am J Cardiol 1975 ;36 :506-8 .

Jones R.M . American doctors and the Parisian medical world, 18301840 . Bull Hist Med 1973 ;47 :40-65 177-204 .
Kampmeier RH . Medicine as an art : the history and physical examination . So Med J 1982 ;75 :203-10 .
Keele KD . The evolution of clinical methods in medicine . Springfield : Charles C Thomas, 1963 .
Keele KD . Uses and abuses of medical history . Br Med J 1966 ;2 :
1251-54 .
Keele KD . The application of the physics of sound to 19th century cardiology : with particular reference to the part played
by CJB Williams and James Hope . Clio Medica 1973 ;8 :191221 .
Keys TE, Rucker CW . The atlases of ophthalmoscopy : a bibliography 1850-1960 . Am J Ophthal 1960 ;49 :881-94 .
King LS . Signs and symptoms . JAMA 1968 ;206 :1063-65 .
Klemperer P . Pathologic anatomy at the end of the eighteenth
century. J Mount Sinai Hosp 1957 ;24 :589-603 .
Korns HM . A brief history of physical diagnosis . Ann Med Hist
1939 ;1 :50-67 .
Lebensohn JE . An anthology of ophthalmic classics . Baltimore :
Williams and Wilkins, 1969 .
Liddell EGT. The discovery of reflexes . Oxford : Clarendon Press,
1960 .
Llewelyn DEH, Anderson J . The historical development of the
concepts of diagnosis and prognosis and their relationship to
probabilistic inference . Med Info 1980 ;5(4) :267-80 .
Ludmerer KM . Learning to heal : the development of American
medical education . New York : Basic Books, 1985 .
Major RH . Physical diagnosis . In : Physical diagnosis . Philadelphia :
WB Saunders, 1937 :17-28 .
Major RH. A history of medicine . Springfield : Charles C Thomas,
1954 .
Major RH, Delp MH . Physical diagnosis . 6th ed . Philadelphia : WB
Saunders, 1962 :1-8 .
Major RH . Physical diagnosis in antiquity . J Kansas Med Soc
1962 ;63 :497-99 .
Mark HH . The first ophthalmoscope? Adolph Kussmaul 1845 .
Arch Ophthalmol 1970 ;84 :520-21 .
Martinet L . Manual of pathology . Translated with notes and Additions by Jones Quain . 2nd ed . London : W Simpkin and R
Marshall, 1827 .
McHenry LC . Garrison's history of neurology . Springfield : Charles
C Thomas, 1969 :347-52 .
McKusick VA . Cardiovascular sound in health and disease . Baltimore : Williams and Wilkins, 1958 :1-51 .
Middleton WS. A biographic history of physical diagnosis . Ann
Med Hist 1924 ;6 :426-52 .
Morgan WL, Engel GL . The clinical approach to the patient. Philadelphia : WB Saunders, 1969 .
Musher DM . Dominguez EA. Bar-Sela A . Edouard Sequin and the
social power of thermometry . N Engl J Med 1987 ;316(2) :11516.
Newman C . Physical signs in the London hospitals . Med Hist
1958 ;2 :195-201 .
Newman C . Diagnostic investigation before Laennec . Med Hist
1960 ;4 :322-29 .
Numbers RL, ed . The education of American physicians historical
essays . Berkeley : University of California Press, 1980 .
Osler W . Influence of Louis on American medicine . Johns Hopkins
Hosp Bull 1897 ;8 :161-67.
Osler W . The evolution of modern medicine . New Haven : Yale
University Press, 1921 .
Parrino TA . The art and science of percussion . Hosp Prac
1987 ;22 :25-36 .
The past and present school of Paris . Boston Med Surg J 18661867 ;75 :389-90 .
Pearlman JT, Pearlman SJ, Engreen FE . Early efforts to view the
human fundus . Doc Ophthalmol 1973 ;34 :317-25 .
Platt FW, McMath JC . Clinical hypocompetence : the interview. Ann
Intern Med 1979 ;91 :898-902 .

1 . THE ORIGINS OF THE HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Pratt JH . The development of physical diagnosis . N Engl J Med
1935 ;213 :639-44 .
Reiser SJ . The medical influence of the stethoscope . Sci Am
1979 ;240 :148-50,153-56 .
Riese W . The structure of Galen's diagnostic reasoning . Bull New
York Acad Med 1968 ;44 :778-91 .
Robertson WE . Physical diagnosis from the time of Rontgen . Ann
Med Hist 1934 ;6 :255-63 .
Rosenberg CE . Social class and medical care in nineteenth-century
America : the rise and fall of the dispensary . J Hist Med Alli Sci
1974 ;29 :32-54 .
Rucker CW . A history of the ophthalmoscope . Rochester, Minn :
Whiting Printers and Stationers, 1971 .
Ryle JA . The training and use of the senses in clinical work . Guy's
Hosp Gaz 1933 ;47 :421-27 .
Sakula A. Pierre Adolphe Piorry (1794-1879) : pioneer of percussion and pleximetry . Thorax 1979 ;34 :575-81 .
Schiller F. The reflex hammer . Med Hist 1967 ;11 :75-85 .
Segall HN . Evolution of graphic symbols for cardiovascular sounds
and murmurs. Br Heart J 1962 ;24 :1-10 .
Segall HN . How Korotkoff the surgeon discovered the auscultatory
method of measuring arterial pressure . Ann Intern Med
1975 ;83 :561-62 .

21

Shryock RH . The development of modern medicine . New York :
Knopf, 1947 .
Siegel RE . Clinical observation in Hippocrates : an essay on the
evolution of the diagnostic art . J Mount Sinai Hosp 1964 ;31 :285303 .
Segerist HE . A history of medicine . New York : Oxford University
Press 1951 ;1 .
Siegerist HE. On percussion of the chest. Bull Inst Hist Med
1936 ;4 :21-25 .
Singer CJ . A short history of medicine . New York : Oxford University Press, 1928 .
Smith DC . Austin Flint and auscultation in America . J Hist Med
Alli Sci 1978 ;33 :129-49 .
Stoeckle JD, Billings JA . A history of history-taking : the medical
interview . J Gen Intern Med 1987 ;2 :119-27 .
Talbott JH, Louis, PCA. (1787-1872) : A biographical history of
medicine . New York : Grune and Stratton, 19xx .
Welch WH . Papers and addresses . Vol. 3 . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press, 1920.
Wunderlich CA . Medical thermometry and human temperature .
New York : William Wood, 1871 .
Zebrowski A . A new magnifying glass for otoscopy . Ann Otol Rhinol
Laryngol1923 ;32 :453-55 .

